For this paper, I would like to reflect on my relationship with a good friend who I have known for decades. We met back in high school through the sci-fi / fantasy club and bonded over our love for TV shows, cooking, and tabletop games. We kept in touch throughout college and graduate school, even while we went to separate colleges. After I moved back home from graduate school, we ended up living close to each other and have been in touch ever since. Recently, he was diagnosed with autism as an adult and has been figuring out how to handle some of the symptoms that go along with the diagnosis.

Admittedly, this person is not a student that I have taught in a classroom. Even so, I think reflecting on my relationship with my friend would make for a great topic for the paper because I have seen him work in classrooms as a teacher. We worked together at 8th Light after I finished graduate school; part of our job was to mentor new apprentices who were starting their career in software development. This friend was one of the biggest contributors to the apprenticeship program that the company ever had. Autism made teaching in the classroom difficult at times, but surprisingly made some aspects of teaching easier.

## Getting the Diagnosis

Growing up, I always knew that my friend had a few quirks about him. He could sometimes be difficult to communicate with and it often seemed like we misunderstood each other. At first I chalked it up to poor communication on both of our parts, but I later suspected that he might be mildly autistic. He never had any formal diagnosis as a child or teenager, and I never brought it up.

Recently, my friend was diagnosed with autism as an adult. From an outside perspective, getting this diagnosis was simultaneously revealing and extremely confusing for him. On the one hand, a lot of the social mishaps that he could recall with other people suddenly made more sense. He found a huge sense of relief realizing that his brain was wired a bit different, and that it could explain some of the difficulties he had in social situations. My friend is a problem solver at heart. Before, he did not have a good understanding of why he was struggling in certain social situations. After the diagnosis, he could identify the source of some of his social troubles, and he could take steps to solve them. This created a new sense of control over his life which was great to see.

On the other hand, getting the diagnosis was unnerving because he had to rethink how he viewed the world compared to other people. How does he view the world versus the "average" person? Are there other parts of his life that he is viewing "incorrectly"? I am purposefully using negative words like "incorrect" here because although there is nothing wrong with his way of thinking, he did have that moment of deep reflection and had to get past that mindset. Luckily, he had a great support group and is doing well post-diagnosis. 

## Precision in Language

One thing that people have noticed while communicating with my friend is that you need to be very precise with you language. For example, if you are talking about doing the laundry, don't say that you are washing some clothes. What if there are bedsheets in the wash? He might interpret that as "wash the clothes, but leave the bedsheets to the side for whatever reason". 

This can be seen in the classroom as well. If you are one of his students learning how to write tests for the very first time, you might say that "I could not test this part of the codebase for reason X". His initial interpretation might be "reason X has nothing to do with testing this part of the codebase, thus, there should be no issue writing tests". He believes that he has effectively addressed the issue - writing the tests and the issue that the student mentioned are distinct. Now that they know that, they can write the tests with ease. However, he sometimes has trouble digging in one level deeper. Why did this student think that tests were related to reason X? Did they come to the realization that the two concepts are distinct, even after they were told?

My friend's precision in language is not always bad - it can actually be a huge benefit at times! Suppose we are writing some new code and we need to outline the "contract" for an endpoint. In other words, what will the request look like? What does the response look like? What information do you give the server? How are errors formatted? He is very good at thinking about all of the intricate details of this situation and expressing them through writing. He uses precise language to think of expressive names and a good structure that benefits the end users of the code.

## Social Cues

One thing that my friend has repeatedly mentioned is that he often has trouble picking up on social cues during conversations. These cues include facial expressions, subtleties in tone, sarcasm, or body language. This can been challenging for my friend while he is teaching - especially when he is working in an online environment where you cannot always see a person's full face and body.

He solves the problem of picking up on social cues in a variety of ways. First, he has set up his home office to take advantage of all of the features of video conferencing software. When you talk with him online, your video is prominently featured on a second screen so that he can see your face in detail. He has a great audio system using Jabras that makes his voice and yours as clear as possible. He also makes a conscious effort to pay extra attention to social cues like body language and facial expressions. He will take time after a conversation to ask other people if they interpreted certain parts of the conversation in the same way that he did.

One interesting example of what I mentioned above is that he does not like conducting meetings on platforms like Zoom unless he can see the video of the other person. For many people, having the video on is not that big of a deal, and many people will ignore the video. My friend, however, pays attention to the video because he has to concentrate on the social cues. For him, having the video turned off is like losing 50% of the conversation.

Another example of how he solves the problem of social cues is through pair programming. He enjoys sitting next to a person, live, and working through a problem with them. Being physically next to a person helps him better understand their thoughts and issues as they are solving problems because he can ask clarifying questions. He can also make use of tools like whiteboards to express his thoughts in different ways (e.g. like pictures or diagrams).

## Concluding Thoughts

Autism ranges on a spectrum, and my friend's story does not necessarily apply to others. Compared to other people with autism, he has relatively mild symptoms that do not interfere with his day to day life. However, his symptoms do make it hard for him to engage in certain aspects of social life like picking up social cues. This can lead to difficulties when he teaches new apprentices.

My friend is a talented software developer who is also a great teacher. He spends time thinking about how autism affects his thought patterns and how he can communicate effectively with his apprentices in the classroom. This reflection paper reinforced the fact that workplaces need to think about how to support employees with autism. Otherwise, they are going to lose out on a lot of talented people like my friend.